# SI 506 Week 03: Spam, main(), optional params, keyword args, indexing, slicing, and Spam

## Topics

1. Reference
2. Lecture data
3. Program structure: the `main()` function
   1. Execution modes
   2. Why `main()`?
   3. Example script `area.py`
4. Functions: optional parameters and keyword arguments
   1. Optional parameters
   2. Keyword arguments
   3. Skipping optional parameters (why keyword arguments matter)
   4. Challenges
      1. Challenge 01
5. Working with sequences
   1. Object behavior: creating a list from a string
      1. `str.split()`
      2. `str.splitlines()`
   2. Challenges
      1. Challenge 02
6. Indexing
   1. Accessing a character by position
   2. Accessing a list element by position
   3. Mutating a list element using indexing
   4. Challenges
      1. Challenge 03
7. Slicing
   1. Slicing start/end range
   2. Working with stride values
   3. Challenges
      1. Challenge 04
      2. Challenge 05
8. Additional string and list methods
   1. Select `str` methods
      1. `str.find()`, `str.rfind()`
      2. `str.index()`, `str.rindex()`
   2. Select `list` methods
      1. `list.index()`
      2. `list.append()`
      3. `list.insert()`
      4. `list.pop()`
      5. `list.remove()`
      6. `list.sort()`
   3. Challenges
      1. Challenge 06
      2. Challenge 07

## 1.0 Reference

Bookmark the following
[w3schools](https://www.w3schools.com/python/default.asp) Python pages and/or have them open in a
set of browser tabs both during class and while working on this week's problem set:

* ["Python Built-in Functions"](https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_ref_functions.asp)
* ["Python Operators"](https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_operators.asp)
* ["Python List Methods"](https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_ref_list.asp)
* ["Python String Methods"](https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_ref_string.asp)
* ["Python Tuple Methods"](https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_ref_tuple.asp).

## 2.0 Lecture data

It is quite natural to assume that the Python programming language is named after the family of
snakes known as _Pythonidae_ or python. But you would be wrong.
[Guido van Rossum](https://gvanrossum.github.io/), the creator of the Python programming language
named it after the absurdist English comedy sketch series
[_Monty Python's Flying Circus_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monty_Python%27s_Flying_Circus)
(1969-1974) which starred the "Pythons" Graham Chapman, John Cleese, Eric Idle, Terry Jones,
Michael Palin and the animator Terry Gilliam.

This week's lecture features data derived from various Monty Python comedy sketches including the
Pythons' famous ["Spam" sketch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spam_(Monty_Python)) (1970) including
the Spam dominated cafe
[menu](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spam_(Monty_Python)#/media/File:Monty_Python_Live_02-07-14_13_04_42_(14598710791).jpg).

During the Second World War and after Britain imposed rationing restrictions and, starting in 1941,
imported massive quantities of canned spam from the United States as a protein substitute for
imports of beef, pork, and poultry. The public, including my parents, grew to loathe it--which the
sketch plays upon in surrealist fashion.

:bulb: Have you ever wondered why unwanted email is referred to as "spam". Watch the
["Spam" sketch](https://vimeo.com/329001211) and you'll quickly understand why.

## 3.0 The `main()` function

The Python interpreter executes a program or script line by line starting from the top of the `*.py`
file. However, a code pattern exists that provides a more structured approach to defining an
"entry" or starting point for a program or script.

### 3.1 Execution modes

Python features _two_ file execution modes. Code in a file can be executed as a script from the
command line or the code can be _imported_ into another Python file in order to access its
definitions and statements.

If a Python file is executed from the command line the Python interpreter will run the file under
the special name "dunder" (i.e., double underscore) `__main__` rather than the program's actual
file name (e.g., `si506_xy.py`). We refer to such a file as a _script_ or a program.

Given this naming behavior we can choose the program's entry point and control the
program's execution flow by directing the Python interpreter to call a function named `main()`
_first_ in order to execute the statements defined in its code block.

```python
def main():
    # Execute statements
    # < statement A >
    # < statement B >
    # ...

if __name__ == "__main__":
    main() # call main function
```

### 3.2 Why `main()`?

Employing a `main()` function to manage your program's flow of execution separates the code
you write to manage a program's work flow from the code you write to perform specific tasks (e.g.,
functions). This encourages code modularization and, by relying on function calls to perform
specific tasks, helps to eliminate code duplication.

An important side benefit is that with the work flow code restricted to `main()` the other
definitions and statements comprising the file (e.g., functions, classes, constants) can be
imported as a module into another Python module without triggering the code located in `main()`.
This can occur because module code imported from one Python file into another Python file is known
by the Python interpreter by the module's actual file name and not by the name `__main__` as is the
case with scripts/programs run from the command line.

:bulb: the key takeaway from this section is that a Python script's _entry point_ can be
orchestrated to provide a controlled programmatic flow of execution.

We will cover modules, module imports, and execution modes in greater detail later in the semester.

### 3.3 Script example

The Python script `area.py` illustrates the pattern. The program computes the area of a circle based
on a user providing a radius value via a terminal prompt. Since the file is run in the terminal the
Python interpreter knows it by the name of "\_\_main\_\_".

Note that `area.py` imports a module named [`math`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/math.html).
The `math` module is part of the Python standard library. It provides useful mathematical functions
and constants such as pi (`π`) that `area.py` can leverage. Since the module is imported the Python
interpreter knows it by its (original) name "math".

At this point in your learning focus on the overall __structure__ of `area.py` rather than the
individual lines of code. Globally, the script contains the following statements:

1. An `import` statement (accesses the built-in `math` module).
2. A constant named `PI` (by convention the variable is capitalized).
3. The function definition `get_circle_area()`. Computes the area of a circle.
4. A function definition `main()`. Serves as the entry point to the script and orchestrator of
   the program's flow of execution.
5. An `if` statement that evaluates the name of the file. If the Python file recognizes
   the file by the name of "\_\_main\_\_" the function `main()` is called and its code block is
   executed.

:bulb: Take heart; within a few weeks you will be able to read `area.py` and comprehend fully the
syntax, semantics, and operation(s) expressed by each line of code in the script.

```python
import math  # module import

# Constant
PI = math.pi  # π = ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter


def get_circle_area(radius):
    return PI * math.pow(radius, 2)


def main():
    msgs = [
        "\nThis program computes the area of a circle.",
        "Please provide the circle's radius (cm): ",
        "The area of a circle with radius {radius} cm equals {area} cm².\n",
        "Invalid input. Please provide a positive number greater than zero.\n",
    ]

    print(msgs[0])

    radius = None
    while not radius:
        string = input(msgs[1])
        radius = float(string)
        if radius > 0:
            area = get_circle_area(radius)
            print(msgs[2].format(radius=radius, area=area))
        else:
            print(msgs[3])
            continue


if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()  # Entry point: call main() function

```

## 4.0 Functions: optional parameters and keyword arguments

During the previous lesson you encountered the __function__, a _callable_ comprising a defined block
of code that can be invoked&mdash;optionally with arguments&mdash;to perform a specified operation.

Below is a summary of what we know so far about a user-defined function:

* Defined using the keyword `def` and given a name that ends with parentheses `()`.

* Can be provisioned with one or more _parameters_. This allows the function to accept
  input (known as _arguments_) for processing.

* Arguments are passed by _position_. In other words, the caller must pass the arguments in the
  correct order to ensure that the function can process the values as expected.

* Declaration line is terminated by a colon (`:`).

* Code block _must_ be indented.

* May include a `return` statement that both signals the end of the computation performed and
  returns the computed value to the caller. A function that does not specify a `return` statement
  returns `None` to the caller.

* Executed if, and only if, it is called explicitly; otherwise, the function's code
  block is ignored by the Python interpreter.

### 4.1 Optional parameters

As noted above, a function definition can specify one or more parameter values. Each parameter can
also specify __a default value__. In such cases, the caller is _not required_ to pass in a
corresponding argument unless a need exists to override the default value.

In the example below, the function `calculate_sale_price()` is provisioned with three parameters:
`price`, `quantity`, and `discount`. In order to compute the list price (no discount) of a single
`28` oz can of baked beans the caller is obliged to pass all three arguments to the function:
`baked_beans`, `1`, and `0`.

```python
def calculate_sale_price(price, quantity, discount):
    return quantity * price * (1 - discount)  # pass in .15 for 15% discount

def main():
   # Supermarket list price
   eggs = 2.59  # Kroger Grade A Large Eggs 12 ct
   bacon = 6.49  # Jimmy Dean Applewood Smoked Bacon 12 oz
   sausage = 3.79  # Kroger Original Breakfast Sausage 12 oz
   baked_beans = 2.79  # Busch's Baked Beans 28 oz
   spam = 4.19  # Spam Classic 12 oz

   item = calculate_sale_price(baked_beans, 1, 0.0)  # all three arguments are required
```

Yet it is reasonable to assume that the `quantity` desired will in all cases equal `1` or greater
while a `discount` may or may not be applied to the list price. Given this, the function definition
can be adjusted to mark both `quantity` and `discount` as __optional__ parameters by providing each
with a default value (`1` and `0.0` respectively).

:exclamation: Note that optional parameters _must_ be listed _after_ all required parameters in
order to allow required arguments to be passed solely by position.

If the caller is satisfied with both default `quantity` and `discount` values, they can call the
function and supply it with a single argument: `price`. Otherwise, they are free to override one or
both of the optional parameters default values.

```python
def calculate_sale_price(price, quantity=1, discount=0.0):
    return quantity * price * (1 - discount)

def main():
   # ...
   baked_beans = 2.79  # Busch's Baked Beans 28 oz
   spam = 4.19  # Spam Classic 12 oz

   item_01 = calculate_sale_price(baked_beans)  # One can (no discount)
   item_02 = calculate_sale_price(spam, 2, 0.0475) # Two tins (discount)
```

### 4.2 Keyword arguments

The caller of a function can pass _keyword arguments_ specifying both a key and value in the form
`key=value`. The argument is denoted by its keyword rather than by its position in the function's
parameter list.

Keyword arguments free you from having to worry about correctly ordering your arguments in the
function call. Each keyword argument specified clarify the "name" of each value in the function call
by binding the value directly to the key.

The following example illustrates passing keyword arguments in _reverse_ order to that specified by
the function definition:

```python
def calculate_sale_price(price, quantity=1, discount=0.0):
    return quantity * price * (1 - discount)

def main():
   # ...
   spam = 4.19  # Spam Classic 12 oz

   item = calculate_sale_price(discount=0.0475, quantity=2, price=spam)  # reverse order
```

:exclamation: By convention keyword arguments _do not_ include spaces on either side of the
assignment operator. The auto grader will check your keyword argument styling so style your keyword
arguments per [PEP 08](https://pep8.org/#other-recommendations):

```python
# Do this
some_var = some_func(arg_01=val_01, arg_02=val_02)

# Not this
some_var = some_func(arg_01 = val_01, arg_02 = val_02)
```

### 4.3 Skipping optional parameters (why keyword arguments matter)

If a function definition includes _multiple_ optional parameters, a keyword argument
_must_ be employed whenever a preceeding optional argument is skipped when calling the function.

In the example below a `discount` of `0.475` is applied to a single tin of spam using a keyword
argument. The value is bound directly to the key, ensuring that function overrides the `discount`
default value rather than the preceeding `quantity` value. Passing the value as a second argument
_by position_ would result in the function binding the argument to the wrong parameter.

```python
# Quantity not specified, keyword arg used to specify discount
item = calculate_sale_price(spam, discount=0.0475)  # Returns $3.99
```

Passing the discount value _by position_ as a second argment binds the argument to the wrong
parameter and results in the function returning an incorrect price:

```python
item = calculate_sale_price(spam, 0.0475)  # Returns $0.20
```

### 4.4 Challenges

#### 4.4.1 Challenge 01

__Task__. Modify a function's parameter list to include an additional optional parameter.

1. Modify the function named `calculate_sale_price_v1p2()` by adding an additional optional
   parameter named `sales_tax`. Assign the parameter the default value `0.0`.

2. Next, replace `None` in the `return` statement with an expression that computes the `sales_tax`
   and adds it to the `purchase_price`. Return the new price value to the caller.

   :bulb: Determine the sales tax by multiplying the purchase price by the tax rate. The tax
   computed is then added to the purchase price as an additional cost.

3. After modifying `calculate_sale_price_v1p2()` switch to the `main()` function. Call the function
   `calculate_sale_price_v1p2()` and price out three (`3`) cans of __Spam__ at the list price of
   `$4.19` a can. Pay full price (no discount). Specify a sales tax of `0.01`.

   Assign the return value to a variable named `total_cost`.

   Uncomment the accompanying `print()` call, run your code, and review the output. `total_cost`
   _must_ equal `12.6957` (formatted as `$12.70`).

   :bulb: The Great State of Michigan exempts groceries from the sales tax imposed on taxable retail
   sales. This is in contrast to the Commonwealth of Virginia which levies a `0.01` tax on groceries.

## 5.0 Working with sequences

Last week we introduced you to three sequence types: the string (`str`), the list (`list`), and the
tuple (`tuple`). Each of these types is an _iterable_&mdash;an object container whose members
(e.g., characters, elements, items) can be accessed individually or in groups because the position
or order of each member is maintained by the object. Each type is provisioned with methods
(i.e., behaviors) that simplify object interactions and operations.

| Name | Type | Identifying syntax | Mutablity | Description |
|:--- | :--- | :----- | :------ | :---------- |
| List | `<class 'list'>` | Square brackets `[...]` | Mutable | Ordered sequence of elements. |
| String | `<class 'str'>` | Double/Single quotation marks `"..."\|'...'` | Immutable | Ordered sequence of characters. Elements can be added, modified, or removed. |
| Tuple | `<class 'tuple'>` | Parentheses `(...)` | Immutable | Ordered sequence of items. Single item tuple _must_ include a trailing comma (`,`). |

```python

# String
comedy_series = 'Monty Python'
comedy_series_len = len(comedy_series)  # Returns length (i.e., character count)

# TODO: Uncomment immutability check
# comedy_series[0] = 'm'  # TypeError: 'str' object does not support item assignment

# List
pythons = ["Graham Chapman", "John Cleese", "Terry Jones", "Eric Idle", "Michael Palin"]
pythons_len = len(pythons)  # Return the length

# Mutate the list (in-place)
pythons.append("Terry Gilliam")  # Mutate in place
# pythons.insert(-1, "Terry Gilliam")  # Alternative
# pythons.extend(["Terry Gilliam"])  # Alternative

# pythons.insert(0, pythons.pop("Terry Gilliam"))  # Have fun

pythons_all = pythons + ["Neil Innes"]  # list concatenation (new list)

# Tuple
silly_walks = ("Monty Python", "Sketch", "The Ministry of Silly Walks", "15 September 1970")

python_theme_song = ("The Liberty Bell",)  # Note trailing comma

sousa_tune = ("John Philip Sousa", "Composer") + python_theme_song + (1893,)  # tuple concatenation
```

:exclamation: Unlike a string a tuple can reference _mutable_ items like lists and dictionaries that
are themselves capable of modification as is illustrated below:

```python
holy_grail = (
    "Monty Python and the Holy Grail",
    1975,
    [
        "Arthur, King of the Britons",
        "Sir Lancelot the Brave",
        "Sir Bedevere the Wise",
        "Sir Galahad the Pure"
        ]
    )
# holy_grail[1] = '3 April 1975' # Triggers exception
# holy_grail[2] = ["Arthur", "Lancelot", "Bedevere", "Galahad", "Patsy"]  # Triggers exception
holy_grail[2].append('Patsy') # Mutates list item with a new element
```

In a later lecture we will discuss how to compare two or more tuples using comparison operators
(`=`, `<`, `>`) in a conditional statement.

### 5.1 Creating a list from a string

String (`str`) objects are provisioned with two methods that return a version of the
string converted to a list: `str.split()` and `str.splitlines()`.

#### 5.1.1 `str.split(sep=None, maxsplit=-1)`

Returns a list of string elements split on `sep` substring (i.e., separator or delimiter). The
number of splits is specified by the optional `maxsplit` parameter (default = `-1` (i.e., no
limit)). Default behavior is to split the string each time a space (`" "`) is encountered.

```python
sketch_comedy = "Monty Python's Flying Circus"
words = sketch_comedy.split() # Returns ['Monty', "Python's", 'Flying', 'Circus']
```

Passing a `sep` value to `str.split()` will return a list of string elements split at the
specified separator/delimiter:

```python
sketch_titles = "Dead Parrot Sketch, The Spanish Inquisition, The Argument Clinic"
sketches = sketch_titles.split(", ") # Returns ['Dead Parrot Sketch', 'The Spanish Inquisition', 'The Argument Clinic']
```

Specifying a `maxsplit` value places a limit on the number of splits made in the string. In the
following example a `maxsplit` value of `1` is specified. The list returned is comprised of two
elements not three.

```python
sketch_titles = "Dead Parrot Sketch, The Spanish Inquisition, The Argument Clinic"
sketches = sketch_titles.split(", ", 1) # Returns ['Dead Parrot Sketch', 'The Spanish Inquisition, The Argument Clinic']
```

#### 5.1.2 `str.splitlines(keepends=False)`

Returns a list of string elements split on a line boundary or break. Trailing escape sequences such
as `\n` (new line), and `\r` (carriage return), are excluded unless the optional `keepends` default
value is overriden (set to `True`).

:bulb: If you need to split a multiline string (`"""..."""`) on the line ends opt for
`str.splitlines()` over `str.split()`.

The following example employs the `str.splitlines()` method to split the multiline string constant
named `INQUISITION`:

```python
INQUISITION = """Nobody expects the Spanish Inquisition.
Our chief weapon is surprise.
Surprise and fear.
Fear and surprise.
Our TWO weapons are fear and surprise ... and ruthless efficiency.
Our THREE weapons are fear and surprise and ruthless efficiency ... and an almost fanatical devotion to the pope.
Uh! FOUR. No.
Amongst our weapons ....
Amongst our weaponry are such elements as fear, su -- I'll come in again.
"""

def main():
   # ... I didn't expect a kind of Spanish Inquisition.

   dialogue = INQUISITION.splitlines()  # Returns list comprising nine elements

   dialogue = INQUISITION.splitlines(keepends=True) # Each element includes trailing \n
```

:bulb: For other line boundaries that `str.splitlines()` handles see the official
[documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#str.splitlines).

### 5.2 Challenges

#### 5.2.1 Challenge 02

__Task__: Combine two strings and then split the string and return a list of _sentence_ elements.

:bulb: A string can span multiple lines by surrounding it with parentheses (`()`) or employing a
trailing backslash (`\`) after each line. Employing parentheses to delineate the string is the
preferred approach.

Below is a short excerpt from a longer exchange between Arthur, King of the Britons, and a peasant
named Dennis that occurs [early on](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t2c-X8HiBng) in the 1975 film
`Monty Python and the Holy Grail`.

```python
arthur = (
   "The Lady of the Lake, "
   "her arm clad in the purest shimmering samite, "
   "held aloft Excalibur from the bosom of the water "
   "signifying by Divine Providence that "
   "I, Arthur, was to carry Excalibur. "
   "That is why I am your king."
)

dennis = (
   "Listen, strange women lying in ponds distributing swords "
   "is no basis for a system of government. "
   "Supreme executive power derives from a mandate from the masses, "
   "not from some farcical aquatic ceremony."
)
```

1. Combine the `arthur` and `dennis` strings. Assign the new string to a variable named `excalibur`.

   :exclamation: You _must_ maintain proper spacing when joining the strings (i.e., one space
   between sentences).

2. Split the string into a list of __sentence__ elements and assign the new list to a variable named
   `excalibur`. Consider carefully the separator value to employ when splitting the string.

   Uncomment the accompanying `print()` call, run your code, and review the output. The `excalibur`
   list that you create will comprise four (`4`) string elements drawn from the Arthur and Dennis
   exchange.

## 6.0 Indexing

You can access individual members of a sequence by their position or index value. Python's index
notation is __zero-based__. Individual characters in a string or individual elements in a list can
be accessed using the subscript operator (`[]`) and an index value.

:bulb: _slice notation_ employs two brackets `[< index | slice >]`
enclosing either a positive or negative index value (eg., `some_sequence[0]`) or a slicing
expression `some_sequence[:5]`.

| &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp; |
|:------ |:------ |:------ |:------ |:------ |:------ |:------ |:------ |:------ |:------ |:------ |:------ |
|   0    |   1    |   2    |   3    |   4    |   5    |   6    |   7    |   8    |   9    |   10   |   11   |
|   M    |   o    |   n    |   t    |   y    | &nbsp; |   P    |   y    |   t   |    h    |    o   |    n   |
|   -12  |   -11  |  -10   |   -9   |   -8   |   -7   |   -6   |   -5   |    -4  |   -3   |   -2   |   -1   |

### 6.1 Accessing a character by position

```python
name = "Monty Python"
letter = name[0] # first letter (zero-based index)

letter = name[4]

letter = name[-1]
```

:bulb: `name[0]` is considered an expression since it resolves to a value (e.g., "M").

### 6.2 Accessing a list element by position

In the example below, the second item in the Spam sketch cafe menu
(`"Egg, sausage and bacon"`) is accessed using a positive index value while the second to the last
item in the menu (`"Spam, Spam, Spam, Spam, Spam, Spam, baked beans, Spam, Spam, Spam and Spam"`) is
accessed using a negative index value.

```python
menu = [
   "Egg and bacon",
   "Egg, sausage and bacon",
   "Egg and Spam",
   "Egg, bacon and Spam",
   "Egg, bacon, sausage and Spam",
   "Spam, bacon, sausage and Spam",
   "Spam, egg, Spam, Spam, bacon and Spam",
   "Spam, Spam, Spam, egg and Spam",
   "Spam, Spam, Spam, Spam, Spam, Spam, baked beans, Spam, Spam, Spam and Spam",
   "Lobster Thermidor aux crevettes with a Mornay sauce, garnished with truffle pâté, brandy and a fried egg on top and Spam",
]

menu_item = menu[1] # second element (zero-based index)
menu_item = menu[-2] # second to last element
```

### 6.3 Mutating a list element using indexing

You can assign a new value to a list element by referencing its index position.

```python
menu[3] = "Scrambled eggs, bacon and Spam"
```

:exclamation: If an index value references a non-existent position in a sequence an `IndexError`
will be raised.

```python
# UNCOMMENT
# menu_item = menu[10] # IndexError: list index out of range
```

### 6.4 Challenges

#### 6.4.1 Challenge 03

__Task__: Return the first `menu` item that includes more than one helping of Spam.

1. In `main()` call the built-in function `print()`, pass it `menu`, and run your code. Review the
   terminal output and find the first element in the list that includes multiple helpings of Spam.
   Determine the element's __index__ value (perform a manual count from either the beginning of
   the list or the end of the list).

2. Craft an expression that accesses the `menu` element __by its index__. Assign the
   expression&mdash;which resolves to a string&mdash; to a variable named `menu_item`.

   Uncomment both the `print()` call and the `assert` statement and run your code.

:bulb: You will encounter `assert` statements in this week's problem set. Assert statements allow
you to test or _assert_ that a condition is `True`.

```python
assert < expression >
```

In the example above two lists were checked for equality. If the `assert` statement evaluates to
`False` an `AssertionError` is raised and the Python interpreter terminates code execution.

:exclamation: Consider `assert` statements a convenience intended for pre-production testing and
debugging only. Do not rely on `assert` statements to enforce security checks, validate data, or
determine the flow of execution since `assert` statements are disabled when code is executed in
optimized mode. For more on `assert` statements see Leodanis Pozo Ramos,
["Python's assert: Debug and Test Your Code Like a Pro"](https://realpython.com/python-assert-statement/)
(Real Python, Feb 2022).

## 7.0 Slicing

You can access a `list` element, `tuple` item, or `str` character by position using an index
operator. You can also access a subset or _slice_ of elements, items, or characters using Python's
slicing notation.

A slicing operation starts at index position zero (`0`) and returns all members of a sequence up
to but excluding the member located at the specified `end` position. An optional `start` position
can be specified in order to start the slice at an index other than zero (`0`). Negative values
can be employed to commence the slice from the end as opposed to the beginning of the sequence.

An optional `stride` number can also be specified in order to skip members or reverse the slice.
A positive `stride` value will return every *n*th member in the slice range;
inclusion of a negative `stride` value will return every *n*th member in the slice range in
_reverse_ order. The default `stride` value equals `1`.

```python
some_sequence[< start (optional) >: < end >: < stride (optional) >]
```

The slicing syntax simplifies referencing and/or extracting a subset of a given sequence.
List slicing can result in list traversal performance gains since slicing obviates the need to loop
over an entire list in order to operate on a targeted subset of elements. We will explore
this aspect of slicing when we explore list iteration in more detail starting next week.

```python
cast = [
   "Terry Jones, Waitress",
   "Eric Idle, Mr Bun",
   "Graham Chapman, Mrs Bun",
   "John Cleese, The Hungarian",
   "Michael Palin, Historian",
   "Extra, Viking 01",
   "Extra, Viking 02",
   "Extra, Viking 03",
   "Extra, Viking 04",
   "Extra, Viking 05",
   "Extra, Viking 06",
   "Extra, Police Constable"
]
```

### 7.1 Slicing start/end range

:bulb: In the slicing example below the start value `1` is considered _inclusive_ while the end
value `3` is considered _exclusive_ (i.e., the element is excluded from the slice).

```python
# Access Mr and Mrs Bun.
cast_members = cast[1:3] # Resolves to ['Eric Idle, Mr Bun', 'Graham Chapman, Mrs Bun']
```

Negative slicing can also be employed to return the Mr and Mrs Bun:

```python
# Access Mr and Mrs Bun.
cast_members = cast[-11:-9]
```

If you were asked to return a `cast` slice containing _only_ the named cast members the following
slicing expression would get the job done:

```python
# Access named cast members.
named_cast_members = cast[:5] # or cast[0:5]
```

On the other hand, if you were asked to return a `cast` slice containing _only_ the unnamed cast
members (the extras) consider employing negative slicing:

```python
# Access cast extras (i.e., Vikings 01-06, Police Constable) using negative slicing.
cast_members = cast[-7:] # warn: not the same as cast[-7:-1]
```

### 7.2 Working with stride values

An optional `stride` value can be specified to _increase_ the number of slicing steps in order to
_skip_ one or more elements, items, or characters in a sequence. Providing a negative stride value
_reverses_ the operation.

Utilize the Spam sketch `cast` list to practice slicing with `stride` values.

```python
cast = [
   "Terry Jones, Waitress",
   "Eric Idle, Mr Bun",
   "Graham Chapman, Mrs Bun",
   "John Cleese, The Hungarian",
   "Michael Palin, Historian",
   "Extra, Viking 01",
   "Extra, Viking 02",
   "Extra, Viking 03",
   "Extra, Viking 04",
   "Extra, Viking 05",
   "Extra, Viking 06",
   "Extra, Police Constable"
]
```

For example, the optional stride value can be employed to access _Spam_ sketch `cast` members who
are now deceased:

* Terry Jones (1942-2020)
* Graham Chapman (1941-1989)

```python
cast_members = cast[:3:2]
```

You can employ a _negative_ stride value to return a version of the list with the order of the
elements _reversed_:

```python
cast_members = cast[::-1]
```

You can also employ a stride value to return a version of the list containing _every other_ element:

```python
cast_members = cast[::2]
```

### 7.3 Challenges

#### 7.3.1 Challenge 05

__Task__: Retrieve a subset of the `cast` list using __negative slicing__.

1. Employ slicing to access the Viking elements in `cast` using _negative_ index values. Assign the
   return value (a new list) to the variable `vikings`.

2. Uncomment both the `print()` call and the `assert` statement and run your code.

#### 7.3.2 Challenge 06

__Task__: Return every other Viking.

1. Employing slicing with a `stride` value to return _every other_ Viking cast member of the `cast`
   list.

2. Assign the new list to the variable `cast_members`.

3. Uncomment the `print()` call, the `pprint()` call, and the `assert` statement and run your code.

## 8.0 Additional string and list methods

Recall that objects such as strings and lists include "built-in" behaviors that are defined as
_methods_. Calling an object method may require passing one or more arguments to it in order to
perform the requested computation. Depending on the method definition, the operation may
result in a computed value being returned to the caller; otherwise `None` is returned (implicitly).

Last week's discussion of object behaviors focused on a small set of string (`str`) methods. This
week adds another group of string methods along with a set of list (`list`) methods for you to
explore.

### 8.1 Select `str` methods

Lesson 02 covered the following string methods:

* `str.capitalize()`
* `str.count()`
* `str.lower()`/`str.upper()`
* `str.replace()`
* `str.split()`/`str.splitlines()`
* `str.startswith()`/`str.endswith()`

Below is another group of string methods that you should get to know.

#### 8.1.1 `str.find(substr[, start[, end]])`, `str.rfind(substr[, start[, end]])`

`str.find()` attempts to locate the _first_ occurrence of substring `substr` and return its index,
while `str.rfind()` attempts to locate the _last_ occurrence of `substr` and returns its index.
Optional `start` and `end` positions of type `int` can also be specified to target a subset of the
string for inspection.

:exclamation: If `substr` is not located both methods returns `-1`.

```python
menu_item = menu[6]  # "Spam, egg, Spam, Spam, bacon and Spam"

idx = menu_item.find("Spam")  # Returns 0
idx = menu_item.rfind("Spam") # Returns 33
idx = menu_item.find("ham")  # Returns -1
```

#### 8.1.2 `str.index(substr[, start[, end]])`, `str.rindex(substr[, start[, end]])`

`str.index()` attempts to locate the _first_ occurrence of substring `substr` and return its index
while `str.rindex()` attempts to locate the _last_ occurrence of `substr` and return its index.
Optional `start` and `end` positions of type `int` can also be specified to target a subset of the
string for inspection.

:exclamation: If `substr` is not located an `IndexError` is raised.

```python
idx = menu_item.index("bacon and Spam")  # Returns 23
idx = menu_item.rindex("Spam", 11, 21)  # Returns 17 (range search)

# WARN: triggers runtime exception
idx = menu_item.index("ham")  # ValueError: substring not found
```

### 8.2 Select `list` methods

As with strings, List objects (type: `list`) also include "built-in" behaviors that are defined as
_methods_. Calling a `list` method may require passing one or more arguments to it in order to
perform the requested computation. Depending on the method definition, the operation
may result in a computed value being returned to the caller; otherwise `None` is returned.

Below is a select list of `list` methods. Commit these methods and how they behave to memory. 😉

#### 8.2.1 `list.append(element)`

Appends the passed in `element` to the end of a list. The `element` can be of any type (`str`,
`list`, `tuple`, `dict`, etc.) The operation mutates the list __in-place__, returning `None`
implicitly to the caller.

```python
menu_v2 = MENU.splitlines()  # Create a new list
menu_v2.append("red beans and rice") # modify in-place (no variable assignment)
```

:exclamation: Do not assign the return value of `list.append(< element >)` to the current list
variable. Doing so will assign `None` to the variable.

#### 8.2.2 `list.index(element)`

Return the index of the specified `element`.

```python
idx = menu_v2.index("Egg, bacon and Spam")  # Returns 3
```

#### 8.2.3 `list.insert(position, element)`

Insert passed in `element` into list at the specified index `position`. The operation mutates the
list __in-place__, returning `None` implicitly to the caller.

```python
menu_v2.insert(1, "blueberry pancakes, strawberry yogurt, and spam")
```

#### 8.2.4 `list.pop(position=-1)`

Remove list element at the specified index `position`. If no index is specified, the last element
is removed (default value = `-1`). The operation mutates the list `in-place` and returns the removed
element to the caller.

:bulb: Using `list.pop()` allows you to simultaneously remove an item from a list and retrieve it
for further use.

```python
# Remove and return the last item
last_item = menu_v2.pop()  # or menu_v2.pop(-1)

# Remove and return item at specified position
first_item = menu_v2.pop(0)
```

#### 8.2.5 `list.remove(element)`

Removes `element` from the list. The operation mutates the list _in-place_, returning `None`
implicitly to the caller.

```python
item = menu_v2[-1]  # Lobster Thermidor
menu_v2.remove(item)
```

#### 8.2.6 `list.sort()`

Sorts the list. The operation mutates the list _in-place_, returning `None` implicitly to the caller.

:bulb: You can pass the optional arguments `reverse=True|False` (pipe = 'or') as well as
`key=some_function` in order to further specify the sorting criteria. By default, `reverse=False`,
which sorts the list in ascending order. Setting `reverse=True` will sort the list in descending
order.

```python
# Default alpha sort
menu_v2.sort()

# Sort in descending order
menu_v2.sort(reverse=True)
```

### 8.3 Challenges

#### 8.3.1 Challenge 06

__Task__: The _Spam and More_ eatery is under new management and is basing its new menu on the
Python's beloved Bromley cafe menu. Construct a new menu based on the multiline string constant
named `MENU` per management's set of requirements. Employ string and list method calls to accomplish
the task.

Take your time. Break the problem into subproblems. Solve each subproblem in turn by calling the
appropriate `str` or `list` method. Call the built-in `print()` function after each change and check
your progress.

:exclamation: Base the new menu on the multiline string constant named `MENU`. Assign all new
strings returned by the various method calls to a variable named `new_menu`.

__Requirements__

The requirements are listed in no particular order. You will need to consider carefully
the operations to be performed and the order in which they need to occur.

* Replace "sausage" with "toast" __and__ a trailing
  [Serial or Oxford comma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serial_comma) (`,`).
* Append the `new_item` ("belgian waffles, whipped cream, fruit, and spam") to the list.
* Convert all characters to lowercase.
* Convert the multiline string to a list.
* Replace every _third_ helping of "spam" that features in a menu item with "oatmeal".
* Remove the "lobster thermidor ..." menu item from the list.

After implementing the requirements and creating the new menu uncomment the `print()` and
`ppprint()` calls along with the `assert` statement, run your code, and review your work. The
`new_menu` you create _must_ match the constant `NEW_MENU`.

#### 8.3.2 Challenge 07

__Task__: Produce a slimmed down version of `new_menu` that features new and revised menu items.

:bulb: Make frequent use of the built-in `print()` function to check your progress.

1. Employ __slicing__ to create a new list comprising __every other__ element in `new_menu`. Assign
   the new list the variable named `mini_menu`.

2. Retrieve the index of the `mini_menu` element "egg and spam". Assign the integer value to the
   variable named `idx`.

3. Use `idx` to remove the element "egg and spam" from `mini_menu`. Pass the position value to the
   appropriate list method to accomplish the task. Ignore the return value (i.e., do not assign it
   to a variable).

4. Employ __indexing__ to __replace__ the __second to last__ list element in `mini_menu` with the
   string assigned to the variable `new_item`.

   ```python
   new_item = "egg, bacon, sausage, tomatoes, mushrooms, baked beans, toast, and spam"
   ```

5. Add the following new menu item to `mini_menu`. Place it in the fourth (`4th`) position in the
   list.

   ```python
   new_item = "veggie omelette, home fries, toast, and spam"
   ```

6. Access the last element in `mini_menu` using indexing. Assign the value to the variable named
   `menu_item`.

7. Locate the first instance of the string in `menu_item`. Do this by calling the appropriate string
   method. Assign the index value returned to the variable named `idx`.

8. Utilize `idx` and slice notation to produce a `menu_item` slice that excludes all characters
   before "baked beans".

   ```commandline
   "spam, spam, oatmeal, spam, spam, oatmeal, baked beans, spam, spam, oatmeal and spam"
   to
   "baked beans, spam, spam, oatmeal and spam"
   ```

   Replace the __last element__ in `mini_menu` with the slice expression.

9. Uncomment the `print()` and `ppprint()` calls along with the `assert` statement, run
   your code, and review your work. The `mini_menu` you create _must_ match the constant
   `MINI_MENU`.
